---
title:  "Continuous Integration and Deployment Pipeline"
date:   2024-01-29 21:01:03 +0000
categories: development decision
author: Jordan Tallon
layout: post
---

# Introduction
After deciding to follow Test Driven Development and Feature Branching (as outlined in my previous blog), I started to look at CI/CD pipelines. The branch management and unit test set up we landed on offered perfect opportunity for a CI/CD pipeline in the testing workflow. The initial goal of the pipeline is to make sure that all branches pass their unit tests before they are allowed to merge into the main branch. Once they are in the main branch, the pipeline will automatically update and deploy the changes to a live server.

# Jenkins
I decided to use Jenkins as our automation server. The reason I picked Jenkins over the more obvious choices such as GitLab CI/CD is for both personal and practical reasons. I do not know nearly enough about any CI/CD setup to claim one is better than the other, but I have a few reasons why I decided to go with Jenkins for this project:

**Personal Reasons**
1. **Learning Opportunity**
	* Jenkins is quite complex to setup and configure as it requires its own server. This provides a significant learning opportunity as a hands-on experience with setting up and managing a CI/CD pipeline. I consider this an incredibly valuable skill and knowledge to have in the software industry. I am happy to take advantage of the opportunity that this project grants me for self learning to learn how to do a full deployment of an app.
1. **Exposure to Real World Tools**d
	* I have some exposure to GitLab CI/CD, whereas I have no knowledge of Jenkins. Jenkins is widely used in the industry, I personally have heard it mentioned a few times during the INTRA interviews. I believe learning how to use one of the leaders in the CI/CD space will offer me a head start when I enter the professional world. I am very grateful with the opportunity we have with our second semester primarily being focused around this project. It allows me to gain valuable practical experience with industry tools such as Jenkins right before my internship starts.

**Practical Reasons**
1. **Flexibility**
	* Jenkins is highly adaptable to different requirements and environments. It has a ton of plugins and community support available. It can easily integrate with different tools and technologies. I appreciate the flexibility here as our project is potentially a more 'niche' type of app due to its use of machine learning and may require the flexibility Jenkins offers.
2. **Scalability**
	* Jenkins is suitable for both small simple projects and large complex ones. I do not know where the UniFeed project will end up, but I'd like to prepare it for any future use cases. It is unlikely that the project will require large scaling, but I like to follow best practices and set up good foundations throughout the whole development so that no shortcuts are taken and UniFeed is a genuine production ready app.
3. **Reliability** 
	* Since Jenkins is a self hosted solution, I always have total control over its version and environment. With non self-hosted solutions, the project is at the whim of updates potentially breaking the app, accessibility changes (e.g. Access to the pipeline now has a great fee), and availability (What if they just shut down the CI/CD pipeline tool I am using?). 

# Conclusion
My next goal is to figure out a workflow where I can get Jenkins to run integration testing on the UniFeed GitLab repo. I am going to keep it simple for now with just unit testing being performed on the branches. I would like to potentially generate coverage maps and check the code with Pylint (or alternative) at a later date. 

For the deployment aspect, I want to set up my Jenkins server to read from the main branch and deploy any changes to my main server. For this I will need two servers for both the Jenkins app and the live UniFeed app. Before figuring out the server architecture I want to establish a database solution for the project.